Horses, like humans, are mirrors of their environments. They are highly
sensitive creatures and their survival has relied on this instinctive empathy.
They see another creature running in fear and echo that fear, possibly
starting to run as well, unaware of what the danger even is. They learn
from their herd about how to react to their environment. If their mother
is calm and collected in the face of a potential threat or the unknown,
they copy that reaction. Just as humans, for better and for worse, they
strongly retain behavior observed during their young, impressionable years.

When taught by humans, horses absorb our reactions the same as they
would their herd’s in the wild. Many people see horses as malleable
creatures, made for hard work and easy to trade around. This attitude is
heartbreaking to witness and even more devastating to undo. Horses feel
deeply and have a wide range of emotions. Their emotional intelligence is
similar to human’s and their reactions are, more often than not, in response
to an emotion that they’re sensing around them, whether from humans,
another horse, a deer, or any other creature. If we are confused or unaware
of our own moods, they will reflect it to us regardless. Sometimes this can be
quite frustrating when people work with horses, inattentive to the emotions
they are exuding, and unaware of why the horse is annoyed, frustrating, or
unwilling. During these moments of our own oblivion and mindlessness,
horses become our greatest mirrors.

This began as an idea to show inexperienced people different ways that
horses express their emotions, but blossomed into something deeper.

My project invites you to experience how horses mirror the emotions of
those around them. Your happiness and contentment becomes their security
and joy. Your anger becomes their irritation. Your sadness becomes their
worry.

When watching the corresponding clips, see if you can identify the changes
in ear positioning and the muscles around the horses' eyes and mouth. As
humans do, they express themselves through small nuances in their body
language and face.

Thank you for horsing around with my program!